---
title: RTFM
summary: This post is a summary of talk I gave at Austin on Rails in February 2016
---

_This post is a summary of talk I gave at Austin on Rails in February 2016_

One day, very early into my programming journey, I was doing a pair programming exercise with our director of engineering and jotting down a laundry list of concepts to study since I was very new to ruby on rails. We were moving pretty quickly through a rails job that used the nokogiri gem to parse some XML, and I found myself constantly asking questions about some of the methods included in the gem. After about the fifth question, he looked over and told me to add one more term to my list: ‘RTFM.’ I brazenly asked if it was another ruby gem, and he casually shot back: ‘Read The Fucking Manual.’

Feeling like an extra newbie, I checked out the nokogiri docs as soon as I had a chance . The synopsis snippet seemed simple enough, so I cracked open IRB and started playing around with it. Creating the doc variable containing the parsed HTML was straightforward, so I figured it was as easy as calling the class method and working my backwards through the docs. Only, it didn’t quite work out this way.

```ruby
>> require 'nokogiri'
=> true
>> require 'open-uri'
=> true
>> doc = Nokogiri::HTML(open('http://www.nokogiri.org/')); nil
=> nil

>> doc.class
=> Nokogiri::HTML::Document

>> doc.css('nav ul.menu li a').each do |link|
?>   puts link.content
>> end
Docs
GitHub
Installation
Tutorials
Getting Help
=> 0
```

In the above example, I fetch the nokogiri homepage in my doc variable, call the class method on it to see what type of object it is, and then I finish up by calling a css method and loop that parses and returns the link text from the stored HTML. The css method seemed the most interesting, so I navigated to the Nokogiri::HTML::Document page and skimmed through the list of variables looking for it. I completely glazed over about 95% of what was on the page. My eyes caught the Constant Summary and gave up on that after about 3 seconds. The instance attributes and class methods were next. Again, reading over it a few times didn’t get me far, the brevity was completely lost on me.

I finally found the list of instance methods for the Document class, but the .css method was nowhere to be found. At that point, I gave up and started depressingly surfing reddit.

#### I Want Answers NOW!
A few days went by and I focused on the progress I was making in other areas of my work to distract myself for giving up so easily on the nokogiri docs. And then it hit me one day while working on another ticket: StackOverflow was spoiling me.

The ease of StackOverflow and other programming message boards, while incredibly useful, can also be a great impedance to newcomers because it’s so easy to become reliant on these sources instead of taking the time to read documentation and really learn what’s going on inside the source code. The reason I gave up on the docs was because the answer to my question wasn’t a Google search away: it was buried within a volume of dense content that I hadn’t ever taken serious time to consume and learn. And the seemingly high barrier to entry through the cryptic notation was enough to make me want to give up.

A few months went by, and I still hadn’t gotten around to taking another serious shot at actually reading through documentation. And then, a new challenge presented itself in the form of a hastily written, poorly tested, and sanity-draining app that I inherited at work. No documentation, no specs, just a multithreaded JRuby app with some bloated SQL queries that crapped out constantly.

I learned some very infuriating, _cough_, insightful lessons working on this project, mainly because it pried me away from StackOverflow and forced me to start internalizing what was going on instead of searching Google for a quick answer. The app was running an older version of JRuby that didn’t fully support Ruby 2.2 and some of the more popular gems I was used to, and the stack traces, _the fucking stack traces_, made me a believer in docs REALLY quick.

#### Start Simple
A key aspect of documentation I discovered is that not all docs are created equal. Some docs are very descriptive, methodically-written volumes with very well-written user-centric language (Wordpress Codex and Stripe come to mind), while others are generated programmatically from source code using a documentation tool like YARD (nokogiri) which contain very little user context and wayfinding.

There’s nothing wrong with the latter form of documentation, but it’s important to keep the learning curve in mind when you go searching for answers. For me, tinkering around in IRB is best when trying to understand the in’s and out’s of these tools. Let’s jump back to our IRB session and mess around with some of the methods provided. We’ll start by running .methods on the doc variable we created earlier, which will return an array of all methods available to the specified object (and then we’ll sort it for good measure.)

```ruby
>> doc.methods.sort
=> [:!, :!=, :!~, :%, :/, :<<, :<=>, :==, :===, :=~, :>, :[], :[]=, :__id__, :__send__, :accept, :add_child, :add_next_sibling, :add_previous_sibling, :after, :ai, :all?, :ancestors, :any?, :at, :at_css, :at_xpath, :attr, :attribute, :attribute_nodes, :attribute_with_ns, :awesome_inspect, :awesome_print, :before, :blank?, :canonicalize, :cdata?, :child, :children, :children=, :chunk, :class, :clone, :collect, :collect_concat, :collect_namespaces, :comment?, :content, :content=, :count, :create_cdata, :create_comment, :create_element, :create_entity, :create_external_subset, :create_internal_subset, :create_text_node, :css, :css_path, :cycle, :decorate, :decorate!, :decorators, :define_singleton_method, :delete, :description, :detect, :display, :do_xinclude, :document, :document?, :drop, :drop_while, :dup, :each, :each_cons, :each_entry, :each_slice, :each_with_index, :each_with_object, :elem?, :element?, :element_children, :elements, :encode_special_chars, :encoding, :encoding=, :entries, :enum_for, :eql?, :equal?, :errors, :errors=, :extend, :external_subset, :find, :find_all, :find_index, :first, :first_element_child, :flat_map, :fragment, :fragment?, :freeze, :frozen?, :get_attribute, :grep, :group_by, :has_attribute?, :hash, :html?, :include?, :inject, :inner_html, :inner_html=, :inner_text, :inspect, :instance_eval, :instance_exec, :instance_of?, :instance_variable_defined?, :instance_variable_get, :instance_variable_set, :instance_variables, :internal_subset, :is_a?, :itself, :key?, :keys, :kind_of?, :lang, :lang=, :last_element_child, :lazy, :map, :matches?, :max, :max_by, :member?, :meta_encoding, :meta_encoding=, :method, :methods, :min, :min_by, :minmax, :minmax_by, :name, :name=, :namespace=, :namespace_scopes, :namespaced_key?, :namespaces, :native_content=, :next, :next=, :next_element, :next_sibling, :nil?, :node_name, :node_name=, :node_type, :none?, :object_id, :one?, :parent=, :parse, :partition, :path, :pointer_id, :prepend_child, :pretty_print, :previous, :previous=, :previous_element, :previous_sibling, :private_methods, :processing_instruction?, :protected_methods, :public_method, :public_methods, :public_send, :read_only?, :reduce, :reject, :remove, :remove_attribute, :remove_instance_variable, :remove_namespaces!, :replace, :respond_to?, :reverse_each, :root, :root=, :search, :select, :send, :serialize, :set_attribute, :singleton_class, :singleton_method, :singleton_methods, :slice_after, :slice_before, :slice_when, :slop!, :sort, :sort_by, :taint, :tainted?, :take, :take_while, :tap, :text, :text?, :title, :title=, :to_a, :to_enum, :to_h, :to_html, :to_java, :to_s, :to_str, :to_xhtml, :to_xml, :traverse, :trust, :type, :unlink, :untaint, :untrust, :untrusted?, :url, :validate, :values, :version, :write_html_to, :write_to, :write_xhtml_to, :write_xml_to, :xml?, :xpath, :zip]
```

It’s a little daunting, but keep in mind that these methods come from many different places. Some are inherited from the ruby core libraries, some are from the Nokogiri::HTML::Document class, and some are inherited explicitly from other classes in the nokogiri gem.

Next, we’re going to figure out where some of these methods come from using the .send method. If you’re not familiar with .send, it’s a method that takes an existing method as an argument and invokes it dynamically, as the example below illustrates:

```ruby
>> string = "350"
=> "350"

>> string.class
=> String

>> string = string.send(:to_i)
=> 350

>> string.class
=> Fixnum
```

This to be a pretty easy way to test unfamiliar methods, and it also makes it easy to introspect a method’s origin. So now we’re going to play with a few of the methods that doc.methods provided and try to see where they’re inherited from, as well as the exact location in the source code. We’re going to call css and then use class to discover which class css belongs to. Then we’re going to use instance_method with css as an argument to create an UnboundMethod object. From here, we use source_location to give us what we’re looking for, which is an array that contains the full path to the specified method’s file, and the line number where it’s defined.

```ruby
>> list_items = doc.css(‘li’); nil
=> nil

>> li_class = list_items.class
=> Nokogiri::XML::NodeSet

>> method = li_class.instance_method(:css)
=> #<UnboundMethod: Nokogiri::XML::NodeSet#css>

>> method.source_location
=> ["/Users/username/.rvm/gems/ruby-2.2.0/gems/nokogiri-1.6.7.1/lib/nokogiri/xml/node_set.rb", 72]
```

With the exact location of the source, all that’s left to do is read through it, which can be the hardest part.
